---
layout: cv
title: CV
permalink: /cv/
---

# Bryan S. Graham
Associate Professor of Economics, University of California - Berkeley  
[academic webpage](http://bryangraham.github.io/econometrics/), <bgraham@econ.berkeley.edu>

## Current Position
`2011 - present` Associate Professor (w/ tenure), Department of Economics, University of California – Berkeley

## Past Positions
`2009 - 2011` Assistant Professor, Department of Economics, New York University  
`2005 - 2011` Assistant Professor, Department of Economics, University of California – Berkeley (on leave 2009 - 2011)

## Education

`2000 - 2005` __Harvard University, M.A. & Ph.D. in Economics__  
- MacArthur Network on Social Interactions and Economic Inequality Fellow  
- Harvard University Program on Justice, Welfare and Economics Fellow  
- National Science Foundation Graduate Fellow  

`1998 – 2000` __Oxford University, St. Antony’s College, M.Phil. in Economics__  
- Rhodes Scholar  

`1997 - 1998` __Australian National University, Visiting Graduate Student__  
- Fulbright Scholar  

`1993 - 1997` __Tufts University, B.A. in Quantitative Economics__  
- Summa Cum Laude  

## Grants, fellowships, and awards
`2015 - 2018` National Science Foundation (SES #1357499) grant: “Econometric models for networks and matching with heterogeneous agents” (PI) (325K)  
`2009 – 2012` National Science Foundation (SES #0921928) grant: “Collaborative research: identification, estimation and application of semiparametric panel data models” (PI) (365K)  
`2008 – 2009` National Science Foundation (SES #0820361) grant: “Collaborative research: the econometrics of reallocations in the presence of complementarity and social spillovers: estimands, identification and estimation” (PI) (212K)  
`2005 – 2008, 2014` Committee on Research (COR), UC – Berkeley, Faculty Research Grants (multiple awards) (30K)  
`2006 – 2007` Center for Health Research (CHR), UC – Berkeley, New Faculty Grant (5K)  
`2005` Review of Economics Studies Tour  
`2004 – 2005` MacArthur Network on Social Interactions and Economic Inequality Fellowship  
`2003 – 2004` Harvard University Program on Justice, Welfare and Economics Fellowship  
`2000 – 2003` National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship  
`1998 – 2000` Rhodes Scholarship  
`1997 – 1998` Fulbright Scholarship  
`1997` Daniel Ounjian Prize  
Lewis F. Manly Memorial Prize  
Phi Beta Kappa  

## Publications
`Citation analysis:` [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=ff5UvfQAAAAJ&hl=en), [ResearcherID](http://www.researcherid.com/rid/H-4515-2011), [Scopus](http://www.scopus.com/authid/detail.uri?authorId=8221099400)

### Articles


`2017` “A quantile correlated random coefficients panel data model,” accepted by the _Journal of Econometrics_ (with Jinyong Hahn, Alex Poirier and Jim Powell).      

"Identifying and estimating neighborhood effects," accepted by the _Journal of Economic Literature_.    

“An econometric model of network formation with degree heterogeneity," accepted by _Econometrica_.

`2016` “Efficient estimation of data combination models by the method of auxiliary-to-study tilting (AST),” _Journal of Business and Economic Statistics_ 34 (2): 288 - 301 (with Cristine Pinto and Daniel Egel).

`2015` “Methods of identification in social networks,” _Annual Review of Economics_ 7 (1): 465 - 485.

`2014` “Complementarity and aggregate implications of assortative matching: a nonparametric analysis,” _Quantitative Economics_ 5 (1): 29 – 66 (with Guido Imbens and Geert Ridder).

`2013` “Comparative static and computational methods for an empirical one-to-one transferable utility matching model,” _Advances in Econometrics_ 31: 151 – 179.

"Comment on \`Social networks and the identification of peer effects\' by Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham and Guido W. Imbens," _Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 31_ (3): 266 – 270.

`2012` “Identification and estimation of average partial effects in \`irregular\' correlated random coefficient panel data models,” _Econometrica_ 80 (5): 2105 – 2152 (with James Powell).

“Inverse probability tilting for moment condition models with missing data,” _Review of Economic Studies_ 79 (3): 1053 – 1079 (with Cristine Pinto & Daniel Egel).

`2011` “Robustness to parametric assumptions in missing data models,” _American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings_ 101 (3): 538 - 543 (with Keisuke Hirano). 

“Efficiency bounds for missing data models with semiparametric restrictions,” _Econometrica_ 79 (2): 437 – 452.

“Econometric methods for the analysis of assignment problems in the presence of complementarity and social spillovers,” _Handbook of Social Economics_ 1B: 965 – 1052 (J. Benhabib, M. O. Jacksons & A. Bisin, Eds.). Amsterdam: North-Holland.

`2009` “The incidental parameter problem in a non-differentiable panel data model,” _Economics Letters_ 105 (2): 181 – 182 (with Jinyong Hahn and James Powell).

`2008` “Identifying social interactions through conditional variance restrictions,” _Econometrica_ 76 (3): 643 – 660.

`2006` “Rich nations, poor nations: how much can multiple equilibria explain?” _Journal of Economic Growth_ 11 (1): 5 – 41 (with Jonathan R.W. Temple).

`2005` “Identification and estimation of the linear-in-means model of social interactions,” _Economics Letters_ 88 (1): 1 – 6 (with Jinyong Hahn).

`2003` “Longevity and life cycle savings,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 105 (3): 319 – 338 (with David E. Bloom and David Canning).

`1998` “Economic Growth in Papua New Guinea: Some Empirical Evidence,” _Pacific Economic Bulletin_ 13 (2): 158 – 165.

### Books & Reports 
`2013` _Mobility and the metropolis: the relationship between inequality in urban communities and economic mobility._ Washington D.C.: Pew Charitable Trusts (with Patrick Sharkey).

`1998` _Exchange Rate Policy in Papua New Guinea._ Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea: Institute of National Affairs, 1998. (with Ronald Duncan and others).

### Submitted working papers
`2016` "Identification and efficiency bounds for the average match function under conditionally exogenous matching,” revision requested by the _Journal of Business and Economic Statistics_ (with Guido W. Imbens and Geert Ridder).

“Homophily and transitivity in dynamic network formation,” revision requested by the _Review of Economic Studies_.  

`2010` “Measuring the effects of segregation in the presence of social spillovers: a nonparametric approach” (with Guido Imbens and Geert Ridder). 

### Work in progress
`2016` "The analysis of networks" (survey in preparation for the next volume of the _Handbook of Econometrics_).  

_The Econometrics of Social and Economic Networks_ (edited book under contract with Elsevier, joint with Aureo de Paula).  

"Closing the teacher quality gap: an empirical analysis of a teacher assignment problem" (with Geert Ridder, Petra Thiemann and Gema Zamarro).


### Inactive manuscripts
`2011` “Inverse probability tilting estimation of average treatment effects in Stata,” conditionally accepted by
_The Stata Journal_ (with Cristine Pinto and Daniel Egel).

`2008` “Endogenous neighborhood selection, the distribution of income, and the identification of neighborhood effects”.

`2007` “Redistributive effects for discretely-valued inputs,” (with Guido W. Imbens and Geert Ridder).

`2005` “Small sample properties of GMM and GEL estimation and inference procedures for social interaction models”.

## Selected invited talks & lectures (including scheduled)
`2017` Invited lecture, Cowles Summer Conference on Networks, Yale University    
`2016` Keynote Speaker, Belgian Network Research Forum (BeNet)  
Invited lecture, U.K. Econometrics Study Group, University of Bristol  
`2015` Yale Institute of Network Science Distinguished Lecture  
Invited lecture, Cornell / Penn State Conference on Econometrics and IO, Cornell University  
`2014` Keynote Speaker, Seattle-Vancouver Econometrics Conference, University of Washington  
`2012` Invited “Social Interactions” session of the European Summer Meetings of the Econometric Society, University of Málaga  

## Teaching
`Undergraduate` Econometrics, Applied Econometrics  
`Graduate` 1st & 2nd year Econometrics, Applied Econometrics  

## Short courses
`2017` “Econometric Analysis of Network Data,” Department of Economics, University of Oslo, Norway    
“Econometric Analysis of Network Data,” Department of Economics, Singapore Management University, Singapore    
“Econometric Analysis of Network Data,” Georgetown Center for Econometric Practice (GCEP) Masterclass, Georgetown University   
`2016` “Econometric Methods for Networks,” Center for Operations Research and Econometrics (CORE), Belgium    
“Econometric Methods for Social Spillovers and Networks,” University of St. Gallen, Switzerland  
`2015` “Empirical Methods for Program Evaluation and Networks,” CEMFI Summer School, Spain  
`2014` “Econometric Methods for the Analysis of Social Interactions and Networks,” CEMFI, Madrid  
		
## Service to the profession

### On campus
`Department` Undergraduate, graduate, personnel committees. Equity advisor.  
`Campus-wide` Faculty advisory committee for UC Martial Arts Program.  
Committee on Courses & Instruction (COCI).  

### Editorial positions
`2014 - present` Co-Editor, _Review of Economics and Statistics_  
`2013 - 2015` Foreign Editor, _Review of Economics Studies_  
`2013` Associate Editor, _Econometrics Journal_  
`2011 - 2013` Associate Editor, _Journal of Business and Economic Statistics_  
Board of Editors, _Journal of Economic Literature_  

### Conferences
`2016` Co-Organizer, Berkeley/CEMMAP Conference on Networks  
`2012` Program Committee, North American Summer Meetings of the Econometric Society  
`2008` Co-Organizer, All-UC Econometrics Conference  

### Research affiliations
`2016 - present` Research Fellow, Center for Evaluation and Development, University of Mannheim  
`2015 - present` Associate Fellow, USC Dornsife INET  
`2012 - present` Member, Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Working Group, INET  
`2006 - present` Faculty Research Fellow (Labor Studies), National Bureau of Economic Research  
Research Affiliate, Bureau for Research and Economic Analysis of Development  
`2009 – 2011` Visiting Professor of Research, Federal Reserve Bank of New York (short visits)  
`2006 – 2011` Research Affiliate (Development Economics), Centre for Economic Policy Research  

Last updated: May 2017 -->


